---
layout: single
title: "Cryptography: Hash Functions"
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
tags: UCL-Course COMP0143 Blockchain Cryptography
author_profile: true
read_time: true
toc: true
classes: wide
---

UCL Course COMP0143 Cryptocurrencies: Prerequisite Cryptography Part I

<!--more-->

---
### Hash Functions

#### Motivation

Passwords stored in server database should not be stored in plaintext

Possible Solutions:

- Using encryption: have to care about the secret keys

- Using one-way function: have to care about the possible collisions

    e.g., given the one-way function \\(f\\), there could exist a password \\(pw^\prime \neq pw\\) but \\(f(pw^\prime) = f(pw)\\)


#### Definition

***Hash Function*** is a one-way function  

which maps **<span style="color:Red">arbitrary-sized</span>** input \\(m\\) into an output \\(h\\) with **<span style="color:Red">fixed-length</span>** \\(l\\)


#### Properties

- **<span style="color:Red">Collision Resistant (CR)</span>**

    $$
    Pr[\text{HashColl}_{\mathcal{A},{H^s}}(\lambda) = 1] \leq negl(\lambda)
    $$  

    where \\(H^s: \\{0,1\\}^{l'(\lambda)} \rightarrow \\{0,1\\}^{l(\lambda)}\\) with \\(s \leftarrow Gen(\lambda)\\) and \\(l'(\lambda) > l(\lambda)\\)

    Note: \\(s\\) is public and need not be random.

    The \\(\text{HashColl}_{\mathcal{A},{H^s}}(\lambda)\\) Process:

    1. \\(s \xleftarrow{\$} Gen(1^\lambda)\\)
   
    2. \\((x,y) \leftarrow \mathcal{A}(1^\lambda,s)\\)

    3. return \\(1\\) when \\(x \neq y \implies H^s(x) = H^s(y)\\) otherwise returns \\(0\\)

    ***An Easier Explanation:***

    It is hard to find different \\(m_0\\) and \\(m_1\\), such that \\(H(m_0) = H(m_1)\\)

- **<span style="color:Red">Preimage Resistance (PR1)</span>**

    For given \\(x \xleftarrow{\$} \\{0,1\\}^*, h := H^s(x)\\),

    it is infeasible for any PPT adversary \\(\mathcal{A}\\) who knows \\(s\\) and \\(h\\)

    to find \\(y \in \\{0,1\\}^*\\) which meets \\(h = H^s(y)\\)

    ***An Easier Explanation:***

    It is hard to find a \\(m\\) for a given \\(h\\), such that \\(h = H(m)\\)

- **<span style="color:Red">Second Preimage Resistance (PR2)</span>**

    For given \\(x \xleftarrow{\$} \\{0,1\\}^*, h := H^s(x)\\),

    it is infeasible for any PPT adversary \\(\mathcal{A}\\) who knows \\(s\\) and \\(x\\)

    to find \\(y \in \\{0,1\\}^*, y \neq x\\) which meets \\(h = H^s(y)\\)

    ***An Easier Explanation:***

    It is hard to find a different \\(m_1\\) for a given \\(m_0\\), such that \\(H(m_0) = H(m_1)\\)

**Relationship between Properties**

- if \\(H\\) is CR, then \\(H\\) is also PR2

- if \\(H\\) is PR2, then \\(H\\) is also PR1 (in practice)

#### Collisions

Since \\(l'(\lambda) > l(\lambda)\\), there must exist collisions

**Using Brute Force Attacks**

Takes exponential time complexity: \\(O(2^l)\\)

**Using Birthday Attacks**

Collision Probability

$$
\frac{q\cdot (q-1)}{4N} \leq Pr[C_{q,N}] \leq \frac{q \cdot (q-1)}{2N}
$$

where 

- \\(N\\) is the number of all possible outputs of \\(H\\) (i.e., \\(N = 2^l\\))

- \\(q\\) is the number of distinct inputs that are hashed

when \\(q \approx \sqrt N\\) with probability \\(\geq \frac{1}{2} − negl(\lambda)\\)

Takes reduced time complexity: \\(O(2^\frac{l}{2})\\) (still **NOT** against PR2 or PR1)


#### Application in Bitcoin: SHA2-256

**Merkle-Damgård Function**

TBD

**Davies-Meyer Compression Function**

TBD

#### Application in Ethereum: Keccak-256

[Keccak Specifications Summary](https://keccak.team/keccak_specs_summary.html)

**Sponge Function**

This is a special method for building cryptographic hash functions  
that can process an **<span style="color:Red">arbitrary-sized input</span>**  and produce an **<span style="color:Red">arbitrary-sized output</span>**.

<u>Parameters</u>

- State Size \\(b\\): total size of the internal state (e.g., 1600 bits for Keccak-256),

- Bitrate Size \\(r\\): the portion of the state that interacts with the input/output (e.g., 1088 bits for Keccak-256),

- Capacity Size \\(c = b - r\\): the portion of the state that provides security (e.g., 512 bits for Keccak-256).

Note: the security level is determined by half the capacity \\(\frac{c}{2}\\).

<u>Padding Scheme</u>

Use multi-rate padding:

1. First, appends a \\(1\\) bit

2. Then, followed by many \\(0\\) bits as needed

3. Finally, ends a \\(1\\) bit

to ensure the padded message length is a multiple of the rate \\(r\\).

<u>Absorbing Phase</u>

1. Set the initial state to zero

2. Split the padded message into \\(M_i\\) blocks (each block length is \\(r\\))

3. Update the first \\(r\\) bits of the current state by XORing with the block \\(M_i\\)

    $$
    state[\, 0: r-1\,] = state[\, 0: r-1\,] \,\oplus \, M_i
    $$

4. Get the next state by applying Keccak-\\(f[1600]\\) permutation function to the updated state

<u>Squeezing Phase</u>

The hash output is taken from the first \\(r\\)  bits of the state when all blocks are aborted

- If the desired hash length is less than or equal to \\(r\\) , it is extracted directly.

- If more output is needed (e.g., length \\(l\\)), take the first \\(r\\) bits of the state as \\(z_0\\),  
    and apply Keccak-\\(f[1600]\\) permutation function again, take the first \\(l-r\\) bits of the state,  
    if \\(l-r > r\\), continue the permutation to get \\(z_i\\), and finally concatenate them together to get the hash.

**Keccak-\\(f[1600]\\) Permutation Function**

<u>State Representation</u>

The state is a 3-dimensional array of bits arranged as \\(5 \times 5 \times w\\) (e.g., \\(w = 64\\) for Keccak-256).

<u>Round</u>

The number of rounds \\(n\\) depends on the permutation width \\(w = 2^l\\)  
and is given by \\(n = 12 + 2l\\) (e.g., \\(n = 24\\) for Keccak-256).

<u>Permutation Steps</u>

The state can be visualized as a \\(5 \times 5\\) grid of *lanes* and each *lane* is \\(w\\) bits long.

Each \\(5 \times 5\\) grid is called *slice* which has 5 *rows* and 5 *columns*

For each round, the permutation will perform the following steps

- \\(\theta\\) Step: computes the parity of each column and mixes this parity into the state (import in-slice diffusion)

- \\(\rho\\) Step: applies a cyclic shift (rotation) to each lane to spread bits over the lanes (import inter-slice diffusion)

- \\(\pi\\) Step: rearranges the positions of the lanes (complete diffusion)

- \\(\chi\\) Step: combines bits using a non-linear function (import non-linearity)

- \\(\iota\\) Step: adds a round constant to the state (break symmetry)

Note: please check the official specifications summary for more details.

---
### Merkle Trees

#### Definition

A Merkle tree is a tree data structure in which

- every leaf node contains the cryptographic hash of a data block, and

- every non-leaf node contains the cryptographic hash of its child nodes.

Given \\(n\\) inputs \\((x_0, x_1, \dots, x_{n-1})\\) with \\(x_j \in \\{0,1\\}^*\\), nodes \\(a_{i,j}\\) in the binary Merkle tree:

$$
a_{i,j} = \begin{cases}
\, H(x_j), & i = 0 \\
\, H(a_{i-1, 2j} \, || \, a_{i-1, 2j+1}), & 1 \leq i \leq k
\end{cases}
$$

where 

- \\(0 \leq j \leq \frac{n}{2^i} - 1\\)

- \\(k = log_2n\\) which is the Merkle tree height

- nodes \\(a_{i,j}\\) when \\(i = 0\\) are called *leaves*

- node \\(a_{i,j}\\) when \\(i = k\\) is called *Merkle root*

#### Operations

**Tree Creating**

The Merkle tree is created according to the definition

Note: if there is an odd number of leaf nodes, the last node is duplicated to form a pair.

**Root Calculating**

The Merkle root is calculated once the tree is created (\\(i = k\\))

Note: any change in any data block will alter that leaf hash and propagate changes along the path up to the root.

**Proof Generating**

<u>Process</u>

1. Identify the target leaf hash: \\(H(x_j)\\).

2. Collect sibling hashes at each level: \\(k-1\\) hashes of sibling nodes are required to reconstruct the path to the root.

3. Generate proof: the proof \\(\pi\\) consists of the target leaf hash and the list of sibling hashes at each level.

<span style="color:Red">Note: the Merkle proof is efficient since only a small subset of the tree is needed to verify the inclusion.</span>

**Inclusion Verifying**

The verification can be done by comparing the root from the reconstructed path according to the given proof.

**Tree Updating**

Updating (adding, removing, modifying) data blocks need to recompute the affected hashes.

**Tree Pruning**

Reduce storage requirements by 

- removing unnecessary parts of the tree, while 

- retaining the ability to verify data inclusion.

#### Application in Bitcoin: Binary Merkle Tree

TBD

#### Application in Ethereum: Merkle Patricia Trie

Ethereum needs to efficiently store, update, and check key-value pairs with variable-length keys.

**Radix Trie**

A radix trie is a space-optimized trie where each node with only one child is merged with its child.

This compression reduces the number of nodes and edges, saving memory and potentially improving lookup times.

<u>Key-Value Node Structure</u>

```
[i_0, i_1, ..., i_n, value]
```

where 

- `i_0, i_1, ... i_n` is the key of the node (represented by the symbols of the alphabet)

- `value` is the value of the node (stores the value)

<u>Key-Value Node Example</u>

Given a key-value pair `<'dog', 4>`

1. Turn `dog` into letters of the alphabet: `d o g`

2. Follow path to find the value: `root -> d -> o -> g -> 4`

**Merkle Radix Trie**

Provide integrity using Keccak-256 Hash Function and Recursive Length Prefix (RLP) Serialization

$$
\textit{path} := \text{Keccak-256}\Big(\text{RLP}(\textit{value})\Big)
$$

<u>Modifications</u>

- The atomic unit becomes a single hex character (called *nibble*)

- Each node can maximally refer to 16 children and have a `value` element

- Node structure becomes a 17 element array `[i_0, i_1, ..., i_15, value]` 

Note: this 17 element array is the `Branch` node type in Ethereum.

**Recursive Length Prefix Serialization**

[RLP Specifications Summary](https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/data-structures-and-encoding/rlp/)

**Merkle Patricia Trie**

Patricia is short for *[Practical Algorithm To Retrieve Information Coded in Alphanumeric](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/321479.321481)*.

<u>Inefficiency of Merkle Radix Trie</u>

Since each hex character in `path` corresponds to a node in the trie,  
and `path` in Ethereum is usually 64 hex characters long (32 bytes).

- Space Inefficiency: need over a kilobyte of extra space to store one level per character

- Time Inefficiency: need to take the full 64 steps for each lookup or delete

<u>Optimization via Node Types</u>

- *NULL*: represented as the empty string

- *Branch*: 17 element array `[ v0, v1, ..., v15, vt ]`

- *Leaf*: 2 element array `[ encodedPath_L, value ]`

- *Extension*: 2 element array `[ encodedPath_E, key ]`

When reaching a node where no divergent path exists for at least part of the way down,  
the default method is to create up to 15 *NULL* nodes along the path. 

To avoid this, shortcut the descent by setting up an *Extension* node of the form `[ encodedPath_E, key ]`,  

- `encodedPath_E` contains the *partial path* to skip ahead via a compact encoding

- `key` is used for the next lookup

Then, a *Leaf* node can be marked by a flag in the first hex character of the `encodedPath_L`,  
the path encodes all prior node's path fragments such that can look up the value directly.

<u>Ambiguity Solution</u>

When traversing paths in hex characters, may end up with an odd number of hex characters to traverse.  
However, all data are stored in **bytes** format, and this will introduce ambiguity.  
For example, one hex character `1` and two hex characters `01` are both stored as `01`.

Therefore, the *partial path* is prefixed with a flag to specify odd length.

``` python
def compact_encode(hexarray):
    # Determine if there is a termination flag (Leaf nodes will have a termination flag)
    term = 1 if hexarray[-1] == 16 else 0
    if term:
        hexarray = hexarray[:-1]  # Remove the last element if it's 16

    # Check if the length of the hex array is odd
    oddlen = len(hexarray) % 2

    # Set the flags: 2 * term + oddlen
    flags = 2 * term + oddlen

    # Adjust the array based on whether its length is odd
    if oddlen:
        hexarray = [flags] + hexarray
    else:
        hexarray = [flags, 0] + hexarray

    # Ensure that the hexarray has an even length and the first hex character is the flags
    output = bytearray()

    # Combine two hex characters into a byte
    for i in range(0, len(hexarray), 2):
        output.append(16 * hexarray[i] + hexarray[i + 1])

    # Convert each byte to its hexadecimal representation without '0x' prefix
    output = [format(byte, '02x') for byte in output]
    return output
```

To simplify:

- Add `0x00` as prefix if the node is an *Extension* node and the path consists of even number of hex characters.

    `[ 0x0, 0x1, 0x2, 0x3, 0x4, 0x5 ] => [ '00', '01', '23', '45' ]`

- Add `0x1` as prefix if the node is an *Extension* node and the path consists of odd number of hex characters.

    `[ 0x1, 0x2, 0x3, 0x4, 0x5 ] => [ '11', '23', '45' ]`

- Add `0x20` as prefix if the node is a *Leaf* node and the path consists of even number of hex characters.

    `[ 0x0, 0xf, 0x1, 0xc, 0xb, 0x8, 0x10 ] => [ '20', '0f', '1c' ,'b8' ]`

- Add `0x3` as prefix if the node is a *Leaf* node and the path consists of odd number of hex characters.

    `[ 0xf, 0x1, 0xc, 0xb, 0x8, 0x10 ] => [ '3f', '1c', 'b8' ]`

<u>Comprehensive Example</u>

Input

```
    <'do'>    = <64 6f>          : 'verb'
    <'dog'>   = <64 6f 67>       : 'puppy'
    <'doge'>  = <64 6f 67 65>    : 'coins'
    <'horse'> = <68 6f 72 73 65> : 'stallion'
```

Output

```
    rootHash: [ <16>, hashA ]
    hashA:    [ <>, <>, <>, <>, hashB, <>, <>, <>, [ <20 6f 72 73 65>, 'stallion' ], <>, <>, <>, <>, <>, <>, <>, <> ]
    hashB:    [ <00 6f>, hashC ]
    hashC:    [ <>, <>, <>, <>, <>, <>, hashD, <>, <>, <>, <>, <>, <>, <>, <>, <>, 'verb' ]
    hashD:    [ <17>, hashE ]
    hashE:    [ <>, <>, <>, <>, <>, <>, [ <35>, 'coins' ], <>, <>, <>, <>, <>, <>, <>, <>, <>, 'puppy' ]
```

Explanation

- `rootHash` is an *Extension* node, where its `encodedPath` is `[ 0x6 ] => [ '16' ]`.

- `hashA` is a *Branch* node, where its child at Index `4` points to `hashB` and child at Index `8` points to a *Leaf* node.

    Note: this *Branch* node does not have a value.

- `[ <20 6f 72 73 65>, 'stallion' ]` is a *Leaf* node which is pointed by the child at Index `8` in `hashA`,

    where its `encodedPath` is `[ 0x6, 0xf, 0x7, 0x2, 0x7, 0x3, 0x6, 0x5, 0x10 ] => [ '20', '6f', '72', '73', '65' ]`.

- `hashB` is an *Extension* node, where its `encodedPath` is `[ 0x6, 0xf ] => [ '00', '6f' ]`.

- `hashC` is a *Branch* node, where its child at Index `6` points to `hashD`.

    Note: this *Branch* node has a value.

- `hashD` is an *Extension* node, where its `encodedPath` is `[ 0x7 ] => [ '17' ]`.

- `hashE` is a *Branch* node, where its child at Index `6` points to a *Leaf* node.

    Note: this *Branch* node has a value.

- `[ <35>, 'coins' ]` is a *Leaf* node which is pointed by the child at Index `6` in `hashE`,

    where its `encodedPath` is `[ 0x5, 0x10 ] => [ '35' ]`.

Moreover, when one node is referenced inside another node, what is included is

$$
H :=
\begin{cases}
\, \text{Keccak-256}(x) & \text{if } \text{len}(x) \geq 32 \\
\, x & \text{if } \text{len}(x) < 32
\end{cases}
\quad \text{where} \quad x := \text{RLP}(\text{node})
$$

**Trie Types**

- State Trie: stores mappings between account addresses and account states.

    `path := keccak256(ethereumAddress)` and `value := rlp(ethereumAccount)`

    where account state is a 4 element array `[nonce, balance, storageRoot, codeHash]`

- Storage Trie: stores extra mappings between account addresses and all related contract data.

- Transaction Trie: stores transactions included in a block.

- Receipts Trie: stores receipts of transactions (logs and status).