---
layout: single
title: "Introduction to COMP0143"
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
tags: UCL-Course COMP0143 Blockchain
author_profile: true
read_time: true
toc: true
classes: wide
---

UCL Course COMP0143 Cryptocurrencies: LEC-00

<!--more-->

---
### Overview

#### Goal

Creating censorship-resistant, digital payment systems  
that anyone can use which avoids trusted third parties

#### Properties

- ***Decentralized***: Governed by a peer-to-peer network

- ***Pseudonymous***: Users go by many names

- ***Transparent***: All transactions are globally visible

#### Layers in Cryptocurrency Networks

From Top to Down:

- ***Pseudonyms (Users)***

    The **<span style="color:Red">Addresses</span>** are hashes of public keys of a digital signature scheme,  
    which are a kind of *<span style="color:Red">weak identities</span>* and can

    - Issue transactions towards receivers' addresses
  
    - Authorize transactions by attaching digital signatures

    - Create as many addresses as they wish (only a new keypair have to be created)

    However, this kind of weak identities **<span style="color:Red">DO NOT</span>** provide true anonymity

- ***Application Layer***

    Applications (e.g., Decentralized Finance, Games, Gambling, Social Media, ...)  
    run in this layer (whose backed runs on top of a distributed ledger platform)  
    are called ***<span style="color:Red">decentralized applications (dApps)</span>*** (often referred as ***<span style="color:Red">smart contracts</span>*** on Ethereum)

- ***Transaction Layer***

    Blockchain platforms implement ***<span style="color:Red">state machines</span>*** which  
    use a distributed ledger as a public, persistent, append-only state

    Consensus nodes are allowed to update the state under certain conditions  
    by appending blocks with transactions to the blockchain.

    Blockchains usually differ in the way how transactions get formed, verified, and executed,  
    as well as how their state is structured: **UTXO** (Bitcoin) vs. **Account-Based** (Ethereum)

Here is ***Distributed Ledger***: Above are Execution Environments \| \| Below are Infrastructures

- ***Consensus Layer***

    The **<span style="color:Red">Safety</span>** goal is to establish a consistent view  
    in a distributed system of which transactions took place in what order

    The **<span style="color:Red">Liveness</span>** goal is to make sure honest nods can make progress and agree  
    on such a transaction history even if a certain fraction of nodes is offline or malicious

    Classic **Byzantine Fault-Tolerant(BFT) Consensus** assumes a fixed, well-known set of authoritative nodes,  
    such that nodes hear about transactions from their peers and collect them into blocks.

    **Process**  
    (1) an elected leader gets to broadcast a block proposal to the rest of the network  
    (2) honest peers signal acceptance of the block if it fulfills certain predicates  
    (e.g., come from an elected leader, all transactions are valid state transitions...)  
    (3) If enough peers accept the block, then consensus has been reached,  
    and the state of the distributed system gets updated.

    However, it is unclear how to elect a leader as the set of eligible nodes is unknown,  
    and voting may be subject to [Sybil Attack](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sybil_attack) since anyone can run as many nodes as they wish

    Bitcoin introduced ***<span style="color:Red">Nakamoto Consensus</span>*** which shows how to achieve consensus in a decentralized way  
    using ***<span style="color:Red">Proof-of-Work (PoW)</span>*** (solving computationally hard puzzles), which also called ***<span style="color:Red">mining</span>***

- ***Network Layer***

    Nodes use protocols like traditional peer-to-peer (P2P) networks to find and communicate with each other.

    ***<span style="color:Red">Seed nodes</span>*** are run on well-known, trustworthy community members,  
    whose IP address get hardcoded into the client software to enable initial peer detection

    New nodes connect to these *seed nodes* to get an initial list of active peers to bootstrap

    Nodes connect to a few random peers from the initial list,   
    the exchanging behavior is based on ***<span style="color:Red">gossip protocols</span>*** to exchange data


- ***Nodes (Physical Devices)***

    **Consensus Nodes**  
    All nodes that participate in consensus, via mining, BFT consensus, etc.  
    Consensus nodes maintain a full copy of the entire blockchain (metadata + transactions).

    **Archive Nodes**  
    All nodes that do not participate in consensus but store a full copy of the entire blockchain  
    to serve client requests (e.g. dApps, syncing requests by other peers).

    **Full Nodes**  
    All nodes that do not participate in consensus but store a full copy of the latest \\(N\\) blocks of blockchain  
    to serve client requests (e.g. dApps, syncing requests by other peers).

    **Light Nodes**  
    All nodes that only store blockchain metadata (e.g. mobile wallets)

---
### Challenges

[Extend Reading: Top Ten Obstacles along Distributed Ledgers’ Path to Adoption](https://smeiklej.com/files/topten.pdf)  
Author: Sarah Meiklejohn @ University College London

#### Usability

Currently, Bitcoin transactions do not convey much meaning  
unless users already know what they want to look for

#### Governance

Despite the original promise of decentralization,  
governance of blockchain technologies is largely centralized,  
e.g., in the form of mining pools (centralized in China)

***<u>How can we design protocols that distribute voting power more evenly?</u>***

#### Comparability

There are literally thousands of alternative cryptocurrencies by now,  
and it is hard to understand how they differ from each other (aside from their names)

***<u>Can we come up with metrics to compare them?</u>***

#### Safety

When users lose their cryptographic keys, they will lose their coins in cryptocurrencies.

Proper key management is therefore paramount which is a huge challenge in particular for non-technical users.

***<u>How can we design usable and secure fallback mechanisms that allow to recover lost keys?</u>***

#### Agility

Systems use certain instantiations of abstract algorithms and protocols (e.g., SHA256, ECDSA, Nakamoto consensus)

***<u>What if we want to support different ones or have to update to other variants?</u>***

#### Interoperability

***<span style="color:Red"><u>How can the countless different blockchain systems interact with each other as well as legacy systems?</u></span>***

#### Cost-Effectiveness

Bitcoin uses an enormous amount of energy to achieve a throughput of 7 transactions/second

***<u>How can we design cryptocurrency protocols that are more cost-effective?</u>***

#### Privacy

All data on the blockchain is publicly viewable in most cryptocurrencies.

***<span style="color:Red"><u>How can we design cryptocurrencies that provide certain privacy and anonymity guarantees?</u></span>***

Example: [Zcash](https://z.cash/), [Dash](https://www.dash.org/), [Monero](https://www.getmonero.org/)

#### Scalability

Many blockchains are slow (e.g., Bitcoin has a throughput of only 7 transactions/second)

***<u>How can we improve the performance of distributed ledger platforms?</u>***

Blockchain record the entire transaction history of a cryptocurrency.

Since they are append-only data structures, they will continue to grow forever.

Additionally, blockchains also require that each peer stores the entire transaction history

***<u>How can we reduce these data storage requirements?</u>***