---
layout: single
title: "Cryptography: Commitment Schemes"
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
tags: UCL-Course COMP0143 Blockchain Cryptography
author_profile: true
read_time: true
toc: true
classes: wide
---

UCL Course COMP0143 Cryptocurrencies: Prerequisite Cryptography Part IV

<!--more-->

---
### Scenario: Sealed-Bid Auctions

**Process**

- *Bidding Stage*: Bidders submit their sealed bids.

- *Opening Stage*: All bids are opened and the highest one wins.

**Protection against Cheating**

- *Bidding Stage*: A sealed bid \\(c_i\\) should not leak any information about the bid \\(b_i\\).

- *Opening Stage*: A bidder should not be able to open its bid to another one \\(b^\prime_i \neq b_i\\).

---
### Definition 

Commitment Scheme is an interactive protocol between a sender \\(S\\) and a receiver \\(R\\).

#### Components

- **Commit**

	Sender \\(S\\) sends a commitment \\(c := \text{Commit}(m,r)\\) to receiver \\(R\\)  
	where \\(m\\) is the message and \\(r\\) is a randomness.

- **Reveal**

	Sender \\(S\\) reveals \\(c\\) by sending \\(m\\) and \\(r\\) to receiver \\(R\\)  
	who accepts if \\(c =  \text{Commit}(m,r)\\).


#### Security Goal

- **Hiding**

	Receiver \\(R\\) should not be able to obtain any information about \\(m\\) from \\(c\\).

- **Binding**

	Sender \\(S\\) should not be able to reveal \\(c\\) to any other message \\(m^\prime \neq m\\).


#### Adversary Types

- **Hiding-Adversary \\(\mathcal{A}\\)** (role as Receiver \\(R\\))

    who aims to learn information about \\(m\\) from \\(c := \text{Commit}(m,r)\\).

- **Binding-Adversary \\(\mathcal{A}\\)** (role as Sender \\(S\\))

    who aims to find \\((m, r)\\) and \\((m^\prime, r^\prime)\\) that meets \\(\text{Commit}(m,r) = \text{Commit}(m^\prime,r^\prime)\\) and \\(m \neq m^\prime\\).


---
### Pedersen Commitment

#### Protocol

Let \\(<\mathbb{G}, q, g>\\) be a cyclic group where \\(\|\mathbb{G}\| = q\\)  
and \\(g\\) is the generator in which the Discrete Logarithm Problem is hard.

Let \\(h\\) be a randomly chosen generator of \\(\mathbb{G}\\) with \\(g \neq h\\)   
and assume the discrete logarithm \\(x\\) such that \\(h = g^x\\) is unknown.

- **Commit**

	Sender \\(S\\) chooses \\(m \in \mathbb{Z}_q\\) and picks \\(r \xleftarrow{\$} \mathbb{Z}_q\\).
	
	Sender \\(S\\) sends commitment \\(c := g^mh^r\\) to receiver \\(R\\).

- **Reveal**

	Sender \\(S\\) reveals \\(c\\) by sending \\(m\\) and \\(r\\) to receiver \\(R\\) who accepts if \\(c = g^mh^r\\).

#### Hiding Security of Pedersen Commitment

The *Hiding* of Pedersen Commitment provides ***<span style="color:Red">Perfect Security</span>***.

**Proof**

Assume adversary \\(\mathcal{A}\\) is even information-theoretic (knows \\(x = log_gh \implies h = g^x\\)).

Then, the commitment \\(c := g^mh^r = g^m (g^x)^r = g^{m + xr}\\).

The value \\(a = m + xr\\) is uniformly distributed in \\(\mathcal{Z}_q\\) since \\(r \xleftarrow{\$} \mathcal{Z}_q\\).

Then, for any given message \\(m^\prime \in \mathcal{Z}_q\\), there exists an unique \\(r^\prime \in \mathcal{Z}_q\\) meets \\(a = m^\prime + xr^\prime\\).

Then, for any message \\(m^\prime\\) with \\(m^\prime = m\\) or \\(m^\prime \neq m\\), there exists \\(r^\prime\\) meets \\(c = g^{m^\prime}h^{r^\prime}\\).

Therefore, adversary \\(\mathcal{A}\\) cannot distinguish which message is hidden in \\(c\\).

#### Binding Security of of Pedersen Commitment

The *Binding* of Pedersen Commitment provides ***<span style="color:Red">Computational Security</span>***

**Proof**

Assume Pedersen commitment scheme does not provide computationally secure binding  
when the Discrete Logarithm Problem is hard.

Let \\(\mathcal{A}\\) be a PPT adversary which breaks the binding property.

Let \\(\mathcal{B}\\)  be a PPT adversary against Discrete Logarithm Problem that simulates Pedersen Commitment for \\(\mathcal{A}\\).

By reduction:

- \\(\mathcal{A}\\) requests a new commitment from \\(\mathcal{B}\\)  

    such that \\(\mathcal{B}\\) chooses \\(m \in \mathcal{Z}_q\\), picks \\(r \xleftarrow{\$} \mathcal{Z}_q\\), and returns \\(c = g^mh^r\\) to \\(\mathcal{A}\\).

- \\(\mathcal{A}\\) requests to de-commit \\(c\\) from \\(\mathcal{B}\\)  

    such that \\(\mathcal{B}\\) sends \\((m, r)\\) to \\(\mathcal{B}\\).

- According to the assumption of \\(\mathcal{A}\\)'s capability,  

    \\(\mathcal{A}\\) can return \\((m, r)\\) and \\((m^\prime, r^\prime)\\) to \\(\mathcal{B}\\) and break binding successfully,

    which means that \\(c = g^mh^r = g^{m^\prime}h^{r^\prime} = c^\prime\\),

    which means that \\( \ m + xr \equiv m^\prime + xr^\prime \ (mod \ p) \ \\) when \\(h = g^x\\),

    which means that \\( \ x \equiv (m - m^\prime) \cdot (r^\prime - r)^{-1} \ (mod \ p) \ \\),

    which means \\(\mathcal{B}\\) can get \\(x\\) to break DLP (Given \\(h\\) and \\(g\\) to get \\(x\\) when \\(h = g^x\\)).

Note: the Pedersen Commitment cannot provides perfectly secure binding since DLP is only computationally secure.

---
### CRHF-based Commitment Schemes

Let \\(H\\) be a Collision-Resistant Hash Function (CRHF) accepting arbitrary size inputs.

- **Commit**

    Sender \\(S\\) chooses \\(m \in \\{0,1\\}^*\\) and picks \\(r \xleftarrow{\$} \\{0,1\\}^n\\).
	
	Sender \\(S\\) sends commitment \\(c := H(m \ \|\| \ r)\\) to receiver \\(R\\).

	Note: \\(n\\) should be large enough to defend brute force attacks.

- **Reveal**

    Sender \\(S\\) reveals \\(c\\) by sending \\(m\\) and \\(r\\) to receiver \\(R\\) who accepts if \\(c = H(m \ \|\| \ r)\\).

The *hiding* and *binding* of CRHF-based Commitment provide  ***<span style="color:Red">Computational Security</span>*** since \\(H\\) is collision-resistant.

Merkle trees allow to commit efficiently to large sets of values and are very often used in practice (e.g., Blockchain).

---
### Application: Coin Flip Protocol

Alice and Bob want to agree remotely on a random bit \\(b\\)  
which needs a function with joint inputs from Alice and Bob (neither can bias \\(b\\)).

Let \\(b_A\\) be the function result of Alice, and \\(b_B\\) be the function result of Bob.

We say that the Coin Flip protocol is *correct* if \\(b_A = b_B\\).

**Strawman Implementation in Coin Flip Protocol**

Alice chooses \\(b_A \xleftarrow{\$} \\{0,1\\}\\) and Bob \\(b_B \xleftarrow{\$} \\{0,1\\}\\), then both compute \\(b = b_A \oplus b_B\\).

However, this Coin Flip Protocol is insecure:

1. Bob waits until it receive \\(b_A\\)

2. Bob then picks a wanted result \\(b'\\) and replies \\(b_B = b_A \oplus b^\prime\\) to Alice

3. Both Alice and Bob will output \\(b^\prime\\)

**Commitment-based Implementation in Coin Flip Protocol**

<u>Process</u>

1. Alice chooses \\(b_A \xleftarrow{\$} \\{0,1\\}\\) and \\(r \xleftarrow{\$} \\{0,1\\}^n\\)

2. Alice sends the commitment \\(c := \text{Commit}(b_A,r)\\) to Bob

3. Bob chooses \\(b_B \xleftarrow{\$} \\{0,1\\}\\)

4. Bob sends the \\(b_B\\) to Alice

5. Alice reveals \\(c\\) by sending pair \\((b_A, r)\\) to Bob, then computes \\(b = b_A \oplus b_B\\)

6. Bob accepts if \\(c = \text{Commit}(b_A,r)\\) (reject otherwise), then computes \\(b = b_A \oplus b_B\\)

<u>Security</u> 

- If the receiver is dishonest (Bob is the adversary \\(\mathcal{B}\\))

	and if \\(\mathcal{B}\\) can distinguish \\(b_A = 0\\) and \\(b_A = 1\\)

	then, \\(\mathcal{B}\\) can break the hiding security of commitment scheme.

- If the sender is dishonest (Alice is the adversary \\(\mathcal{A}\\))

	and if \\(\mathcal{A}\\) can prepare \\(c\\) and valid pair \\((b_A, r)\\) for both \\(b_A = 0\\) and \\(b_A = 1\\)

	then, \\(\mathcal{A}\\) can break the binding security of commitment scheme.

<u>Problem</u>

When the sender (Alice) receives the reply from the receiver (Bob), Alice can compute \\(b = b_A \oplus b_B\\).

If \\(b\\) is not the result Alice wants, Alice can choose not to reveal \\(c\\) to Bob, then Alice can abort the protocol as she wants.

The possible solution is to use Secret Sharing Schemes.

---
### Application: Sealed-Bid Auctions

- *Bidding Stage*

	Each bidder \\(B_i\\) chooses a bid \\(b_i\\), picks a randomness \\(r_i\\), and publishes \\(c_i = \text{Commit}(b_i, r_i)\\).

	Since commitment schemes are *hiding*, \\(c_i\\) does not leak any information about \\(b_i\\).

- *Opening Stage*

	Bidder \\(B_i\\) reveals \\(c_i\\) by receiving \\(b_i\\) and \\(r_i\\).

	Since commitment schemes are *binding*, \\(B_i\\) cannot change its bid to \\(b^\prime_i \neq b_i\\) after \\(c_i\\) has been published.

- *Evaluation Stage*

	The highest bid \\(b = max(b_i)\\) wins.